Add script to update/generate mod translations (#13739)
minetest/minetest: util/README_mtt_update.md

Reviewer: Please use vertical/straight double-quotes (`"..."`) instead of curly/curved double-quotes (`“...”`).

# `mtt_update.py`—Minetest Translation Updater

> This Python script is intended for use with localized Minetest mods, i.e., mods that use `*.tr` and contain translatable strings of the form `S("This string can be translated")`. It extracts the strings from the mod's source code and updates the localization files accordingly. It can also be used to update the `*.tr` files in Minetest's `builtin` component.

Reviewer 2: I think the character limit rule also applies to documentation. Feel free to correct me if I'm wrong.

Here is the list of all recognized function names. All functions return a string.

* `S`: Returns translation of input. See Minetest's `lua_api.txt`. You should always have at least this function defined.
* `NS`: Returns the input. Useful to make a string visible to the script without actually translating it here.
* `FS`: Same as `S`, but returns a formspec-escaped version of the translation of the input. Supported for convenience.
* `NFS`: Returns a formspec-escaped version of the input, but not translated. Supported for convenience.

Here is the boilerplate code you have to add at the top of your source code file:

    local S = minetest.get_translator("<textdomain>")
    local NS = function(s) return s end
    local FS = function(...) return minetest.formspec_escape(S(...)) end
    local NFS = function(s) return minetest.formspec_escape(s) end

Replace `<textdomain>` above and optionally delete `NS`, `FS` and/or `NFS` if you don't need them.

### Preparing the strings

> Enclose any translatable strings in a function of the form `S("Some string")`. Only literal strings will be detected; variables will be ignored. For a string to be detected, it has to be written in a specific way that satisfies the following rules:
> 
> * The function brackets must contain a single literal string, or a concatenation of literal strings
> * The function brackets **must not** be omitted
> * The string **must** use `"..."`, `'...'` or `[[...]]` as string delimiters
> * If it's a concatenation of literal strings, you can't use `[[...]]` as string delimiters
> * Concatenating a literal string with a variable is **not** permitted and will lead to errors

Reviewer 2: A few examples might help to better understand these rules. What do you think about the following?

```suggestion
This script can detect translatable strings of the notations listed below. Additional
function arguments followed after a literal string are ignored.

* `S("literal")`: one literal string enclosed by the delimiters `"..."`, `'...'` or `[[...]]`
* `S("foo " .. 'bar ' .. "baz")`: concatenation of multiple literal strings. Line breaks are accepted.

Undetectable notations:

* `S"literal"`: omitted function brackets
* `S(variable)`: requires the use of `NS`. See example below.
* `S("literal " .. variable)`: non-static content. Use placeholders (`@1` ...) for dynamic translations.
* Any literal string concatenation using `[[...]]`
```

It might also be a good chance to put a note into lua_api.md` that `string.format` *must not be used* with translated strings. The server modifies the string such that the client cannot translate it any more.

accordingly. It can also be used to update the `*.tr` files in Minetest's `builtin` component.

## Preparing your source code

This script makes assumptions about your source code. Before it is usable, you first have
to prepare your source code accordingly.

### Choosing the textdomain name

It is recommended to set the textdomain name (for `minetest.get_translator`) to be identical
of the mod name as the script will automatically detect it. If the textdomain name differs,
you may have to manually change the `# textdomain:` line of newly generated files.

**Note:** In each `*.tr` file, there **must** be only one textdomain. Multiple textdomains in
the same file are not supported by this script and any additional textdomain line will be
removed.

### Defining the helper functions

In any source code file with translatable strings, you have to manually define helper
functions at the top with something like `local S = minetest.get_translator("<textdomain>")`.
Optionally, you can also define additional helper functions `FS`, `NS` and `NFS` if needed.

Here is the list of all recognized function names. All functions return a string.

> * `S`: Returns translation of input. See Minetest's `lua_api.txt`. You should always have at

Reviewer 3: Wrong file extension:

```suggestion
* `S`: Returns translation of input. See Minetest's `lua_api.md`. You should always have at
```

Also, it might be useful to make this a link.
